Dust cakes our faces, invades our sinuses, and stings our eyes.
The heat bakes the moisture from us with utter relentlessness.
Our body temperatures hover at a hundred and three. Our ears
ring. On the edge of heat exhaustion, we get dizzy as our stom-
achs heave.
We have the spastic shits, with stabs of pain as our guts liquefy
thanks to the menagerie of local bacteria. Inside our base's filthy
outhouses, swarms of flies crawl over us. Without ventilation,
those outhouses are furnaces, pungent with the acrid smell of
well-cooked urine.
All this, and we get shot at, too.
Welcome to the infantry. This is our day, our job. It sucks, and
we hate it, but we endure for two reasons. First, there is nobility
and purpose in our lives. We are America's warrior class. We pro-
tect; we avenge. Second, every moment in the infantry is a test.
If we measure up to the worst days, such as this one, it proves we
stand a breed apart from all other men.
Where we work, there are no cubicles. There are no break
rooms. Ties are foreign objects; we commute in armored fight-
ing vehicles.
Our workplace is not some sterile office or humming factory.
It is a stretch of desolate highway in a vast and empty land. A
guard tower burns in the background. Shattered bodies litter
the ground around us. Vacant corpse eyes, bulging and horror-
struck, stare back at us. The stench of burned flesh is thick in our
nostrils. This was once an Iraqi Civil Defense Corps (ICDC)
checkpoint, designed to regulate traffic in and out of Mub-
dadiyah, one of the key cities in the Diyala Province. Thanks to
a surprise attack launched earlier in the morning, it is nothing
more than a funeral pyre. We arrived too late to help, and our
earnest but untrained allies died horribly as the insurgents swept
over them. One Iraqi soldier took a direct hit from a rocket-
propelled grenade (RPG). All that's left of him are his boots and
soggy piles of bloody meat splattered around the guard tower.
This is our workplace. We began to acclimate to such horrors
right after arriving in the country. While on our second patrol in
Iraq, a civilian candy truck tried to merge with a column of our
armored vehicles, only to get run over and squashed. The occu-
pants were smashed beyond recognition. Our first sight of death
was a man and his wife both ripped open and dismembered,
their intestines strewn across shattered boxes of candy bars. The
entire platoon hadn't eaten for twenty-four hours. We stopped,
and as we stood guard around the wreckage, we grew increas-
ingly hungry. Finally, I stole a few nibbles from one of the
cleaner candy bars. Others wiped away the gore and fuel from
the wrappers and joined me.
That was three weeks ago. We're veterans now, proud that we
That was three weeks ago. We're veterans now, proud that we
can stomach such sights and still carry out our job. It is this mis-
ery that defines us, gives us our identity. It also cleaves infantry-
men apart from everyone else in uniform. Some call it
arrogance. So be it. We call it pride since we believe fervently in
what we are doing.
"Check it out," calls Staff Sergeant Colin Fitts. He points to
a Humvee rolling up the highway toward our battlefield.
The two of us pause and watch the rig approach. Fitts is a Mis-
sissippian with a gravelly voice and intense eyes. We're so close
that long ago I learned to tell every entertaining story from his life
in more detail than he can, and he can do the same with mine.
The Humvee screeches to a stop a short distance from us. In
the right seat sits a clean-cut major. With his tiny, wire-rimmed
glasses, he looks like an accountant in Kevlar. He's so clean that
I doubt he's more than a few hours removed from his last shower.
I can't even remember when I last had one. We've been making
do with whore's baths-baby wipes to the armpits and private
parts-since running water is a luxury not bestowed upon the
infantry.
Right here we have the dichotomy that defines our military.
We all wear the same uniform, but we might as well be from two
different armies. We're the frontline bullet-chewers. This officer
embodies all that we despise about the other half. He is
scrubbed; we are filthy. His skin has rarely seen the sun. We are
sunburned and leathery. He is well fed and a bit on the pudgy
side. Most of our platoon has lost over ten pounds since getting
to Diyala. Maybe that's because when we get a chance to eat, the
appetite doesn't stick around long. Our mess hall is an aban-
doned Iraqi morgue.
"Boys," the major says, "Go tell your sergeant that Quarter
Cav is here!" The major obviously thinks he has a flair for
drama. He doesn't realize that he's just insulted both of us.
Fitts and I are both staff sergeants; our rank insignia are not eas-
ily missed. Fitts turns bright red.
In our world, the world of the infantry, this major is a
wannabe. He sits safe behind the wire, but tries to act the part of
der. At first I think I'm hallucinating. Does this jackoff think
there are unionized smoke breaks in battle?
My weapon comes up automatically. I don't even think. In the
second it takes to set the rifle on burst-fire, my surprise gives way
to cold fury. The muzzle makes contact with the back of his
head.
Fuck a zero. I can't miss now.
My finger twitches twice. Six rounds tear through his skull.
His knees collapse together as if I'd just broken both his legs. As
he sinks down he makes a snorting, piggish sound. I lower my
barrel and trigger another three-round burst into his chest, just
to be sure. He flops to the ground with a meaty slap.
His head bobbles back and forth. He snorts again. I con-
vince myself that this is the man who shot Fitts, and I am roused
to a full fury. His face looks like a bloody Halloween mask and
I stomp it with my boot until he finally dies. While I spike his
weapon, bending the barrel to assure that anyone who uses it
again will only hurt themselves, I notice my entire boot is
bathed in blood and gore.
Rockets fly. Our gunners in the Bradleys have a bead now.
Specialist Shane Gossard, Staff Sergeant Brown's Bradley gun-
ner, blasts away at insurgent positions as they make their way to
Fitts's squad. Cantrell's gunner, Sergeant Chad Ellis, kills two
men running with bags of rockets on their backs. In the cover of
this chaos, my men run and shoot their way into the compound.
Finally, I get through the gate and rush to Fitts.
He's lying on his back, his face waxen. I can tell he's in
shock.
out. When our platoon sergeant realizes two of his men are
hurt, he goes ballistic. He speeds his Bradley to our rescue. Ini-
tially, he can't find us, and his wrath swells until I fear he's on the
verge of an aneurism. He bellows repeatedly over the radio.
I strip Fitts of his weapon, magazines, night vision, and tools.
He understands. He's in no condition to fight, and we'll need
everything for what's ahead. I take everything off him but his can
of Copenhagen dip.
Cantrell's Bradley arrives. Quickly, we load Fitts and Ellis
aboard. Even as the ramp is raised, I hear Fitts giving orders to
his men while Ellis screams for home.
The Bradley lumbers away, my best friend bleeding inside.
Moments later, we wade back into the fight. We battle from
building to building. The killing continues unabated as darkness
approaches. After dark, the advantage will be ours. With our
night-vision equipment, we own the night. The Mahdi militia-
men are fanatical but ill-trained. They only know how to die.
An Air Force F-16 jet arrives to fly back and forth overhead,
bombs slung on the weapon pylons under each wing. They stay
on those racks.
The pilot isn't allowed to drop his ordnance. Division
doesn't want to have to rebuild the damage his bombs will
cause. Apparently, we're fighting a kindler, gentler war.
Welcome to the infantry. Where hajji buildings are worth
more than our lives. Fine, we'll live with the burden. It is just
another test, another measure that sets us apart from the likes of
that Quarter Cav major.
In Diyala, on April 9, 2004, we're in full battle rattle. The
high-intensity urban fighting we've practiced since basic training
is now finally allowed to be unleashed on our enemy. There is no
weak-stomached four-star general to hold back on our reins. We
are again the First Infantry Division of Vietnam and the beaches
of Normandy. We pour through compound gates, rifles shoul-